Okay,
guys.
And welcome back to another student.
Questions,
Alice,
ID lecture.
Now,
this question relates to the choose function on the choose function in isolation.
you'll remember back in the building a database section where assured,
you have to do V look up,
utilizing choose to look up values from the left of the look of value.
But the quit the student question was,
how do you use choose in isolation?
Well,
in its simplest form,
what choose does is a lensed you to choose helps if you type equals in type in front of a
formula.
Bigger there she first lesson of the day.
All right,
so what we have is a few different arguments.
We have the index number on what that means is which of the following values the next
arguments am I to pick?
So that's basically which of the values am I gonna pick?
So if I chose one and hit comma,
then I get to value 123 And I think in go to about 254.
So I could easily type quotes,
apples,
comma quotes,
oranges,
come a quote pairs.
But I'm just gonna point to the cells hit comma come on comma and closed off the brackets.
So here I have three values end for which is apples and five,
which is oranges and six,
which is pairs.
And I'm choosing number one.
So that will be.
And for Apple's now,
obviously,
if I change that to number three,
then it would select the third value and 45 n six and give us pairs.
So in its simplest form,
that's what it does.
So in this lecture,
there's going to be four quick demonstrations of a few different ways to use the choose
function there.
The one thing that I use it for more than anything else,
particularly when doing financial reporting,
is being able to display the fiscal quarter and then build that and eventually create a
fiscal year and quarter,
as you can see at the end here,
where we have F 14 fiscal 14 quarter,
fourth quarter,
4 15 quarter one and so on and so forth.
So down here we just got a bunch of dates from January 25th 2015 through to December 29th
So ultimately,
I would just use this end formula.
But I want to show you the steps I went through to build it.
So the first thing we have to do is extract the months number from this state.
So I'm just going to use the built in Excel function month on point to this cell here.
So when I hit enter,
I get one.
Because January is the first month.
Now,
what I'm gonna do is utilize this value in this formula.
So I'm saying choose,
have a look at B one and tell me what value is in there.
In this instance,
it's one.
And then I'm pointing to this table here.
No.
In the UK,
the financial year runs April through March.
So we don't have quarter 12345111222333 Well,
we actually have his quarter one is April May June courts to June,
July August.
Quarter three is October,
November,
December and quarter Four of this financial year will be January,
February and March of next year.
So this is a really good use for it.
So one of done let me just hit f two.
I have pointed to be,
too,
which gives us the months index number,
then I just have point.
And then I'm just pointing to these values here.
So you here I have l four l five l six,
which represent quarter for and so on and so forth and just as easily could instead of
saying l four,
we could just say four comer four come before then one comma,
one comma,
one to combat to comer two and three Coming three come three Just to give us those 12
values to pick from so that no says that this January is in quarter four.
So we have chosen the first index off this list here.
So that's where we're getting therefore from?
No,
in this formula,
all I've done is I've taken this formula month a four and I have dropped it here over the B
four.
So replaced the cell reference with the actual formula we used in that cell and that will
give us this formula.
Choose month a four comer,
and then we're looking down this table here.
Okay,
so far,
so good.
Now I think that one's have redundant one.
Let me just delete that and hopefully that's not going to make everything awful.
Now,
if you want to add their letter Q to the front of that,
it is literally a simple as typing equals.
Quotes que quotes Andi,
which is essentially can Katyn ating?
And then the formula that we just looked at.
So now waken return the value.
Q.
Four q four q one Q one.
So on and so forth.
Okay,
fiscal year.
Now the fiscal years a little more tricky because we have a logic to apply.
What I've done is I said F Andi,
so that's going to give us our F right up the front.
But we do have to do a test.
So what we want to say is,
if e for this day here equals quarter ful here than what we want to do is take the year and
subtract one.
Now,
here I am saying,
I just want the right to numbers from this particular year,
so right to numbers.
So instead of saying 2015 it will say 15.
Instead of saying 2016 it will say 16.
But if it's quarter for,
subtract one from either 15 or 16 if it isn't quarter for,
then the actual year is the same as the financial year.
And that's where we get our F 14 or F 15 or F 16 from now here what I've done,
I have replaced the A four value with the formula that lives in a four.
Where are we there?
So here I'm just basically taking the formulas and have used earlier and incorporating them
into one big formula.
And then the last thing I'm going to do at the very end is joining the two of them together
.
So I have the first formula that gives me the financial year on.
Then I'm going to say on day,
I'm just going to add that choose formula that we used to establish the month.
And then when it hits escape,
I get F 14 court for court for 15 quarter one on.
That works perfectly.
OK,
so that's one useful it for finding the fiscal year on the fiscal quarter.
Now,
not only can you reference values,
you can also have different formulas as your values.
So here have a really simple table.
We have half a dozen people what their salaries and what their salary bandits.
And in this table,
we say celery band equals a bonus of 10% Salaryman to is 20% salary bound.
Three is 30%.
So here I've just built a simple V look up to say,
look for John and tell me which band is in.
So if I typed in here Rita,
ignore the case in retail is banned.
One,
This is a very look up to tell me what her salary is.
And here we using the choose function,
we're gonna look at B 11 which is the band.
So that gives us a choice Number one and then we're going to use a formula.
What?
We're gonna say ISS C 11 her salary times 0.1 because she is on 10%.
So we're actually using a formula as the first value there.
Now,
if this band was too,
the queues would become too.
And there we have a different formula.
So now we have C 11 her salary times 0.2,
which is going to give her a 20% bonus on lastly,
we have the final form of says if this saves three,
so choose is three.
Choose the third formula,
which will be see 11.
Her salary multiplied.
Boys here by 0.3,
which is 30%.
So if we tested that it,
let's say Matthew So Matthew,
their nephews about into his cell was 25,000 on.
We are choosing the second of air options because B 11 equals two on.
We're looking at that formula there.
See,
11 times 20%.
And you can see that that works out correctly.
Okay,
so that's how you can use formulas in the choose function.
Now,
here,
What we're gonna do is we're going to apply another function,
the some function to the choose.
So what we have If I move out the way we have three columns of data.
We have all of our sales.
Quarter one court to quote 3/4 4 in 14 15 6016.
They're just for reference.
2014 is value 1 2015 is value to 2016.
Value three.
So this is a cell where I'm looking.
So I'm gonna say here 2000 and 14 on what that's going to do is say V look up.
Be nine.
The year we've just typed in here in this table just here on return the second value.
So what this is going to do is look at 2014 here,
straight V,
look up on retrieve the second value,
which is going to give us the index off one.
Okay,
so far,
so good.
So now we know we are choosing one now,
too.
All of our three values B two to B five,
C two to C five on D to two d five.
We want to apply the some function,
so we're going to say it's some.
Then we're going to choose which of the three values we want to look at on.
Then we're actually going to apply the some function to either this range,
this range,
all this range.
So 2014 is 275,000 279.
If I just hover over that and have a look down here,
you can see that's exactly correct.
If I tied 2015 we're now going to choose the second column to some money,
a center to 9 to 172 And if I just drag of that,
they go to 9 to 172 And if I take 2016 and hit.
Enter Boom!
There you go.
We get 207 495 which I'm guessing must be about right They go 207 495 Okay,
so that's another thing that you can use it for.
You can actually use it to some or average or medium or mode.
Any particular column of numbers,
depending on what the choose value is.
Okay,
and they're just for fun.
Here's another one random name picker.
Now,
basically,
I'm going to use the round between to establish what number I'm going to get what the index
number will be.
So round between one comma three will just randomly create a number between one and three.
And when I hit F nine that will re calculate in here,
I've actually typed the three value.
So I have Emma in quotes comma Rita comma sue all the values Aaron quote.
So choose around a number between 13 and then return.
If it's one Emma,
if it's to return.
If it's three soon so they hits.
If I hit Calculate now for hit F nine,
it'll stop recording.
If I calculate now,
you can see that that's rotating through them now is to say you can have 254 different
values in your choose argument on.
If you've only got a couple,
it's it's reasonably easy to actually just type them in in quotes.
But if you have like 100 of them,
that's going to become pretty tedious.
So what I'm gonna do is show you a clever way to take this range and convert it into a
string that looks a little bit like this.
So you can just do the formula a little bit of jiggery pokery,
and they just type it over here.
So here is the formula.
What we have is concoct innate because we're joining all of these individual values
together on we're going to say transposed the range A one through eight.
So we have Emory to sue all the way down to John,
so we're transposing that is,
we're going from the vertical plane to the horizontal plane on now because we need quotes
between at the end of each word and at the beginning of each word beginning.
Add the asking character,
which is C.
H R.
O'Malley's double quotes Andi,
so we have double quotes Andi comma Andi Double quotes again.
Now,
that's part of the formula.
What we want to do is highlight Hall,
all of this part here from transposed all the way over to the last but one bracket.
And then we're gonna hit f.
Okay,
The slight technical hitch there,
apparently,
if I hit F nine while I am recording than the F nine on the recording software takes over
from Excel.
So what we want to do is transposed or highlight from transposed all the way over to the
last but one bracket there.
So we have transposed a one through eight on and Coats 34 Andi comma on Coke 34 again,
never gonna hit F nine Onda.
Why is that not where you OK?
This is just impossible.
Hits half nine.
There we go.
Sorry,
I have no idea what was going on there.
So when I hit f nine that actually converts this range into something that looks like this
now all we're gonna do is do a little bit of clean up.
We're gonna delete the first curly bracket on.
We're gonna delete the second curly bracket and then hit.
Enter.
So that's going to give us something that looks like this.
Now,
as you can see in the formula bar,
we have this in here,
which are basically extra quotes.
But if I right click ribs come off of that.
If I right,
click copy,
right click paste values,
you can see that it actually eliminates that.
So,
no,
all we need to do the quota at the front for Emma on delete the last two parts there.
So now we have our full strings and then we can just copy that Hits escape,
Come over to here on replace all of this with the full list.
Now I can say how many people have got 12345678 I can no se round between one on day eight
.
So there were no hit f nine,
which isn't gonna post the record.
And you can see that that is randomly selecting someone from that list.
OK,
so they go.
I hope that made sense as always.
Any questions?
Just drop it in the Q and A.
Or send me a message and I'll be happy to help.
Have a great day.
Thank you.